1.2 Illumination Invariant Face Recognition
In addition to face pose, illumination is the next most significant factor affecting the appearance
of faces. Ambient lighting changes greatly within and between days and among indoor and outdoor
environments. Due to the 3D structure of the face, a direct lighting source can cast strong
shadows that accentuate or diminish certain facial features. It has been shown experimentally
[2] and theoretically for systems based on principal component analysis (PCA) [50] that differences
in appearance induced by illumination are larger than differences between individuals.
Because dealing with illumination variation is a central topic in computer vision, numerous
approaches for illumination invariant face recognition have been proposed.
Early work in illumination invariant face recognition focused on image representations that
are mostly insensitive to changes in illumination. In one study [2] various image representations
and distance measures were evaluated on a tightly controlled face database that varied
the face pose, illumination, and expression. The image representations include edge maps, 2D
Gabor-like filters, first and second derivatives of the gray-level image, and the logarithmic transformations
of the intensity image along with these representations. However, none of the image
representations was found to be sufficient by itself to overcome variations due to illumination
changes. In more recent work it was shown that the ratio of two images from the same object
is simpler than the ratio of images from different objects [27]. In limited experiments this
method outperformed both correlation and PCA but did not perform as well as the illumination
cone method described below. A related line of work attempted to extract the object’s surface
reflectance as an illumination invariant description of the object [25, 30]. We discuss the most
recent algorithm in this area in more detail in Section 4.2. Sashua and Riklin-Raviv [44] proposed
a different illumination invariant image representation, the quotient image.